Lessons from the past: Some key learnings relevant to the coronavirus crisis
“The more you know about the past, the better prepared you are for the future.”
As we speak, the world finds itself engulfed in one of its worst crises in recent times. The global COVID-19 pandemic has caused never-seen-before disruption in both public and economic life. Not only have factories shut down or supply chains abruptly stopped or millions of workers stranded, but festivals suspended, families separated across countries and public-healthcare systems put under tremendous stress. Such a scenario is a first-time for many, but the world has been through pandemics of a similar scale and nature before, and after the due struggle, emerged victoriously. As the more experienced amongst us would remember, the SARS and MERS outbreaks in the early 2000s presented a similar scenario, although at a much lower rate of infection, yet with higher rates of morbidity. Going back further in time, the 1918 Spanish Flu brought a world just out of the first world war, to a standstill. Considered to be the worst amongst modern-era pandemics, the Influenza pandemic affected one-third of the world’s population and 50 million lives. Yet, preventive measures such as social-distancing, quarantine, mass-vaccinations, public support, and restraint have proved to be successful in all such situations, even being effective in occasional plague outbreaks across the world. We face a similar situation today – an extremely infectious virus, which has already spread globally, confined people to their homes and is causing tremendous economic loss every minute economic activity remains suspended, affecting both the government and the industries alike. 
Can past similar incidents guide industries in such trying times? Can our governments take note of how public-policy measures adopted during the Spanish flu, SARS and MERS outbreak helped in eliminating such pandemics?
What can the Government learn?
The panic due to the outbreak of COVID-19, and more importantly, the lockdown measures to deal with it, are quite similar to those during the 1918 Influenza Pandemic, or as it is more commonly referred to as, the Spanish Flu. Large cities around the world were put under strict lockdowns, and businesses worldwide came to a grinding halt as large chunks of the population became bedridden.
The immediate consequences were the same as the ones observed in the past few weeks – rampant unemployment, supply shortages, and heavy reliance on social security systems, causing a sudden strain on national economic resources.
Impact & Learnings
Effective and transparent communications are one of the most crucial and useful tools in disease control. Iran presents a great example of the damage that can be unleashed by a media-blackout. Secondly, censorship might not be the best way to appease the masses during such times. The long-term political impact of media censorship and manipulation of epidemic-related facts in China is yet to be seen. Still, the short-term international unrest and dissent have only deteriorated international relations. At the risk of quoting a cliché as well as the established Streisand effect, the truth always comes out, no matter how many countries try to hide it.
The Spanish Flu spread was aggravated due to the failure of policymakers in adopting effective containment measures. Research shows that US cities which undertook measures to reduce contact amongst citizens in early-1918 displayed significantly lower peak death rates compared to cities that failed to or were too late to adopt disease containment policies.
