Impact of Indian Economy due to COVID-19
COVID-19: INTRODUCTION
The Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19),
Initially emerged in China at the end of  2019 and by the end of January
2020, The World Health Organization declared this pandemic as a Public Health
Emergency of International Concern. This virus
causes respiratory illness (like the flu) with symptoms such as a cough, fever,
and in more severe cases, difficulty in breathing or may cause lung disease.
Senior Citizens or people under some medical treatment are more likely to
acclimate to this virus.
The impact of this
outbreak is rapidly increasing at a higher rate than anything else in the
economies of various countries of the world. This outbreak is considered a
situation like recession or slowdown of the overall economy after the great
recession in the year 2008. 
India is the
fifth-largest economy in the world with a population of 133.92 Crores. India is
still in its developing phase and its uneven development across regions and
communities adds various complexities in coping up with this kind of pandemic.
It also reflects that there is a huge scope for social schism among the people
of different communities.
In India, the first
case was reported at the end of January month because people travel from China
to India. The government of India made special arrangements for the students
and people who were there in Wuhan for studies and work so that India can save
their people from the effect of this novel coronavirus. The infection rate of
this virus is relatively low in India as compared to its population size
because of the rapid actions taken by the government to quarantine people and
shut borders.
Also, the government
of India announces the suspension of various activities in the country like
shut down of educational institutes and corporate houses, deferring all tourist
visas and postal services, cease all the interstate and intrastate borders
within the country, and terminate all the transportation facilities. The drive
of social distancing and isolation of infected people also takes place. 
The initiatives taken
by the government of India in accordance with this pandemic outbreak affect the
economy in a very drastic way. It changes the way in which the country is
developing. A lot of disruption is happening all around the nation which
challenges the “unimaginably ambitious” aim of the Modi government for
achieving “$5 Trillion Economy” by 2024.
COVID-19: ECONOMIC IMPACT
The Indian economy is
deemed as the fastest developing economies in the world. India has now emerged
as a global preeminent player in the world’s economies and at the third-largest
economy in terms of purchasing power parity. It consists of numerous sectors or
channels such as Hospitality, Education, Retail, E-Commerce, Aviation,
Petroleum, Banking, Automobiles, Pharma or Healthcare, Insurance, and Railways,
etc. which are going unfavourably influenced by this disruption and through
which the economy is getting affected.
COVID-19: HOSPITALITY
The Hotel industry of India has a very vast contribution towards India’s Total Gross Domestic Product. It is the most prominent service sector with market size of $22 Billion in 2019 & the proposed rate of growth by 8.6% till 2025 now becomes a challenge because of this pandemic. The intact turnover of the Indian hospitality sector was sunk between $8.85 billion to $10 billion which reflects depletion of 39% – 45% as correlated to last year’s revenues. The hospitality sector needs to take proactive financial steps to mitigate the impact of COVID 19. It is wholly based on travel, trade, and tourism for its subsistence or existence. This extensive outbreak leads to huge cancellations of bookings in the last months’ leads to the miserable position of hotels in the worrisome declines.
 Hotels are
grappling from crisis amid stringent government restrictions and also
emphasizing on isolation and social distancing. The impact is very huge and is
unpredictable but the sector is at its maturity level and focusing on their
hospitality commitment to and for the society in the best way they can. The big
hotel chains in India propose their rooms and venues for free of cost or at
very highly subsidized rates to the government for the purpose of quarantine
people who came back from abroad and to the medical fraternity to use rooms as
the isolation infirmaries. Also, the pantries are used for preparing feeds for
the needy ones in a proper sanitized manner. 
The industry
professionals have to keep an eye on their rivals to check their surviving
policies at this consequence and they have to sustain their public image in the
market after analysing the after-effects on their pricing and preservation of
their assets. This industry may exceed after witnessing remarkable assurance in
the economy.
COVID-19: EDUCATION
Education is a pretty essential aspect
in an underdeveloped country like India. India’s Education sector proposes a
glorious opportunity to 29% of India’s population which is between the ages of
0-14 years. There is a foreseen rise in India’s higher education sector of Rs
2,44,824 crore by 2025 but as the occurrence of the Virus that’s a troublesome
challenge. 
The COVID-19 outbreak has set off alarm
bells across the country for the 250 million school going students along with
students enrolled in universities in India. India’s education sector is not
unaffected, it has given shut down of school, Colleges and other institutions
this is basically for social distancing to prevent the cause-effect of the
spreading virus and be precaution beforehand of the disruption. India has
resulted in 49.86% of the increase in internet penetration utilized to remit
learning. So to permeate the pauses the virtual classes and online classes are
catching the drift i.e. a merge turn to the digital learning platform.
In the wake of this dilemma and
gripping the student safety in mind and their scholarly concern, most of the
institutes have taken the action to accommodate the convenience of
telecommunication, Skype call, zoom call and admittance to other virtual
prospects to fill the gap of learning. The examinations are being suspended or
postponed keeping the concerns of the burgeoning COVID-19 on the masses
extensively in the consultation. 
Undoubtedly, this is a very crucial
time for students. Ironically, it has taken the COVID-19 outbreak to get the
whole education sector to slip to digital mode and with both humanistic and
technological support. The impact on education is likely to induce losses in
terms of dropout rates and learning outcomes, especially in regions with low shock
resilience.
COVID-19: TRAVEL & TOURISM
