Coronavirus impact on energy markets
The coronavirus, also known as COVID-19, is not only a global public health emergency but also a source of significant regional and increasingly global economic disruption. This impacts the energy and climate world in many ways. The economic downturn puts pressure on global oil prices leading the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to consider further cuts to production. It hurts the demand for natural gas during a time of extremely low prices. It changes the economic, energy, and climate policymaking environment in China, one of the most consequential energy consumers and sources of greenhouse gas emissions. And it has temporarily disrupted supply chains throughout the energy industry, including renewable energy, at a time when supply chain connections with China were being revaluated due to ongoing tariff and trade disputes. How consequential or transformative any of these changes are for the energy sector or for climate efforts will depend upon the ultimate trajectory of the virus outbreak itself
— Sarah Ladislaw, Senior Vice President and Director, Energy Security and Climate Change Program
The energy sector has already felt the impacts of the coronavirus. The outbreak has contributed to a dampened demand for oil, resulting in plummeting oil prices and production declines. As we move forward, then, the energy sector expects to face two headwinds: managing the issues of the health emergency all sectors face, and simultaneously coping with a low oil-price scenario, lower demand and the need to shore up revenue and manage debt obligations.
                               IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON INDIAN ENERGY MARKETS
In India, distribution utilities have a lower tariff for domestic and agricultural consumers, sometimes even below the average cost of supply, as compared to that for commercial and industrial consumers. Table 1 provides the electricity tariff rates in Delhi for selected consumer categories to highlight these differences. Thus, for several distribution companies, the lower tariff-paying consumers are cross-subsidized by commercial and industrial consumers.

The COVID-19 lockdown has led to shut down of all but essential commercial activities across the country. Approximately 1.3 billion citizens are obliged to remain within the confines of their homes and, in many cases, only allowed to work from home. Consequently, the electricity demand from industrial and, commercial customers has reduced significantly while the residential demand is expected to have increased. According to the Power System Operation Corporation of India (POSOCO), The energy met on March 16th, 2020 – which can be considered as a business-as-usual scenario – was 3494 MU as compared to 3113 MU on March 23rd, 2020 a day of voluntary curfew. It further reduced to a range between 2600-2800 MU between March 25th to March 31st, 2020. This trend is illustrated in the below Figure 1.
Thus, firstly, a key risk from the COVID-19 pandemic for the already struggling distribution companies in India arises from the loss of revenues due to the reduction of demand from the commercial and industrial customers as well as the inability to cover the cross-subsidies provided to the lower-tariff paying consumer. Secondly, the utilities would also have to account for the expense to comply with any ‘must buy’ commitments that they have with generators with long-term power purchase agreements. The true and full extent of this risk would only be known once a quantitative analysis is conducted when this crisis situation is contained. Thirdly, at an operational level, distribution companies would have to account for deviation in demand and supply patterns at a temporal and locational level. Finally, during this period, critical infrastructure such as electricity networks would have to be run with minimum employees.
As seen in Figure 1, the trade on the wholesale power market comprises just 4.3 percent of the total electricity transactions. However, the transactions through the power exchanges have grown over the last decade. The Indian Energy Exchange (IEX) has seen a growth from 2616 MU in FY 2009 to 52,241 in FY 2019.

Until now, the trade in the wholesale market is in four market segments:
1) Day-Ahead Market
 2) Term Ahead Market
 3) Renewable Energy Certificates
4) Energy-saving certificates.
 Recently, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) finalized the regulations for implementing real-time markets. This half-hourly market will enable the intra-day trade of electricity, allowing adjustment of generation and consumption profile during the day. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, it was announced by CERC that the real-time market would be operational from April 1st, 2020. However, the starting date has now been delayed by two months to June 1st, 2020. According to media reports, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, some required trials could not be completed. This delay in the real-time market implementation is likely to have a serious, adverse impact on the Indian power market.
Another impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the power markets is in terms of the market dynamic. It can be observed that there is a dip in the clearing volume and the market-clearing price, which coincides with the gradually increasing shutdown measures taken by the government as a response to COVID-19 (See Figure 2). Thus, the reduction in demand due to the lockdown is reflected in the volumes traded on the electricity market and the clearing price.
